---
title: '"Green Roots" Event Spurs Community Climate Action in Dhaka '
date: 2025-12-10
author: YCI
image: /content/images/WhatsApp Image 2025-12-16 at 23.58.58.jpeg
---
The "Green Roots: Community Climate Action" event was a meaningful and impactful community initiative held on Sunday, June 22, 2025, at the Jaago Foundation School in Karail, Dhaka. The event was supported by VSO Bangladesh and organized by the Institute of Disaster Management and Vulnerability Studies (IDMVS), in association with YCI Bangladesh. The formal activities began with a Tree Exchange Program. Each participant brought a non-usable plastic item from home and, in exchange, received a sapling of native species like mango, jackfruit, guava, lemon, and black plum (jam). This initiative aimed to emphasize tree plantation and discourage the use of plastic materials. Following this, a community seminar on Climate Awareness was conducted. The speakers included Ms. Raisa Imran Chowdhury, a Lecturer at IDMVS; Mr. Munir Chowdhury, Senior Admin Officer at JAAGO Foundation School; and several students from IDMVS. They discussed various aspects of climate change and urged the community to adopt sustainable practices. Ms. Raisa Imran stressed the importance of individual action, stating, "If we want to survive on this planet, we must learn to live with climate change. We should all ensure that none of our activities contribute to worsening the climate crisis. Every household should have at least one tree. Change must begin today-if not now, then when?". The event concluded following the seminar with a symbolic Tree Plantation Program. Community members participated in the planting activity within the area, followed by the distribution of light refreshments among all attendees. The initiative successfully raised awareness on climate change, encouraged practical steps like recycling and planting trees, and reached over 50 families with essential knowledge. It also generated enthusiasm for tree plantation and collected community feedback on climate-induced challenges. The enthusiastic community participation reflected the relevance of the issues addressed, and similar initiatives were highly recommended for other urban vulnerable communities.