---
title: '"Dhaka’s Dying Rivers: Causes, Consequences, and the Path to Recovery"'
image: /content/images/650751025_122167012040879118_8763917889200475_n (1).jpg
date: 2025-03-13
author: Labonna Das & Suha Masnun Hossain
---
Once Dhaka was called the "Venice of East”, nurtured by rivers and canals that sustained its life. Now, that same lifeline is a liability. As a result of rapid urbanization and industrialization, the major rivers that are adjacent to Dhaka - Buriganga River, Turag River, Balu river and Shitalakshya river are profoundly polluted. To the 36.6 million inhabitants of this megacity, the crisis isn't just the biologically dead river, it lies in the water coming from the kitchen tap.

One of the main causes of river pollution in this megacity is the release of untreated industrial effluents. More than 9000 industrial units - mainly the textile mills and tanneries are discharging mass untreated toxic waste into our waterways constantly.This is magnified by a decaying draining system from which raw sewage from millions of homes mixes with river water . From metals to plastic runoff, Dhaka's rivers have become an unauthorized waste yard. Collectively, these effects of these actions transformed our waterways into pathways for waste disposal.

Scientific analysis states alarming levels of contamination in Dhaka’s rivers such as Buriganga’s dissolved oxygen (DO) levels falls under 1-2 mg/L whereas aquatic habitat needs at the very least 5 mg/L. It reveals that the water cannot support aquatic ecosystems. Bangladesh’s Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) to maintain a balanced aquatic ecosystem is - 6 mg/L but it stretches to 75 mg/L to 140 mg/L frequently which is substantially higher. Research detected the presence of metal pollutants such as lead(Pb), chromium (Cr), cadmium (Cd) and arsenic (As) in waterways which mainly came from industrial processing's ( dyeing, tanning, metal processing). Seasonal changes further aggravate this pollution . Throughout the dry season, reduced river flow. results in higher concentration of pollutants.

Severe environmental and social consequences are the result of river pollution. One of the substantial effects is the loss of aquatic biodiversity. In Buriganga and Turag, fish population has declined as metal pollutants and oxygen levels make survival difficult. Furthermore, foul odor coming from the polluted river has destroyed the aesthetic and recreational value. The human toll of this crisis is equally adverse. Water contamination is a primary drive of spreading Typhoid, Cholera, Hepatitis A which affect the urban poor and children mainly. Beyond these immediate illnesses, lead and chromium in the food chain increases the chance of kidney failure and cancer. Again economically, the burden isn't less heavy. Families are forced to spend a hefty portion of their income on fuel to boil water and expensive [filtrations. Report](http://filtrations.Report) from World Bank also states that massive loss of productivity occurs due to these health issues in our national economy.

To fix this crisis, the focus should be shifted from ground water to surface water. Already Padma - Jalshira project aims to bring clean water from distant rivers such as Padma river. Nevertheless, the real solution lies in digitalizing the drainage system and ensuring that every industrial unit operates an ETP (Effluent Treatment Plan) which can stop the waste at its origin. Even though large scale change depends on government policies and actions, the residents of Dhaka hold the key to drive direct impact. Starting with responsible waste disposal, ensuring that plastics and domestic waste are never disposed in drains and canals. At home, for secondary household uses, rainwater harvesting is a sustainable alternative which can reduce the strain on groundwater. Lastly as the consumers, we must create civic pressure by reporting illegal industrial dumping to the Department of Environment and demanding regular water quality reports from Dhaka WASA. These small shifts in how we treat our ecosystem can bring back life into Dhaka City’s veins.

It's time to demand clean water as our right , not a luxury.

Sources:

1\. Department of Environment, Bangladesh

2\. [**https://www.worldbank.org/.../bangladesh-country**](https://www.worldbank.org/.../bangladesh-country)[**...**](https://l.facebook.com/l.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.worldbank.org%2Fen%2Fregion%2Fsar%2Fpublication%2Fbangladesh-country-environment-analysis-2023%3Ffbclid%3DIwZXh0bgNhZW0CMTAAYnJpZBExQkV0ek04RzdzNDl2a01BQXNydGMGYXBwX2lkEDIyMjAzOTE3ODgyMDA4OTIAAR7MSUqKKAoBKgv01vyqiUVp_3kBVssoi9QCe0IZyHOJbrjDajJ7CMpvbz_67g_aem_km8y493tKpnj_DWIQswZxA&h=AT5SqqsCLVOPrMuddsQKn_K83QZPv8nD08wCEmJKwBXo4oJPyFZvnNE-GAFsk2e1dVTkZvolZ6mcnJWY9ttX1CD-BxrRDd8d4nM6AO96ry_RYgH1VkB5HIOssDAYu2t59chR4NQsdCbBlIQqbQ&__tn__=-UK-R&c%5B0%5D=AT6V3RM0IASvWRKQ7MuTKmw2i4irMxxWiJjoOSGbHwt96ugQ9Pi1s-eh1GyaNyZhYU6zZ62efMb4syKxmrn2KxPbjFn9MciJoG23ANBogYcQCg5MMY086DmgCDuPd_NH7BVaHFSEC5iCwJF6cy7IMDGL1qrKRvYJwpQot3UGRy1-2f56vxxwpmEZ5rX8ZR6bc3GLxBwJb3naAtsBHzT1jqYktlj8xw)

3\. Riad Khan, M. A. J., Tahnun, M. N., Saif, E., & Islam, M. S. (2023). Recent Water Quality Assessment Of Buriganga and Turag River. Chemical Engineering Research Bulletin, 23(10), 30–35.

Written by:

Labonna Das & Suha Masnun Hossain